structured query language

SQL contains three parts:

- Data definition language includes statements that help you define the database and its objects, e.g., tables, views, triggers, stored procedures, etc.
- Data manipulation language contains statements that allow you to update and query data.
- Data control language allows you to grant the permissions to a user to access specific data in the database.

MySQL is a database management system

MySQL is pretty easy to master in comparison with other **database software like Oracle Database, or Microsoft SQL Server**.

The official way to pronounce MySQL is My Ess Que Ell, not My Sequel. Lmao



## SELECT & FROM	
**SELECT columns FROM tables**

	SELECT *
		FROM demo.orders

## Format
capitalize all SQL command

## LIMIT

## ORDER BY
**command order also matters**

**ORDER BY goes before LIMIT**

Remember ```DESC``` can be added after the column in your ORDER BY statement to sort in descending order, as the default is to sort in ascending order.

	SELECT id, account_id, total_amt_usd
	FROM orders
	ORDER BY total_amt_usd DESC 
	LIMIT 5;	
	
ORDER BY can be used on multiple columns

## WHERE
WHERE filters the orders

**inbetween FROM and ORDER BY**

Common symbols used in WHERE statements include:

1. \> (greater than)

2. < (less than)

3. \>= (greater than or equal to)

4. <= (less than or equal to)

5. = (equal to)

6. != (not equal to)

## Derived Columns

	SELECT id, (standard_amt_usd/total_amt_usd)*100 AS std_percent, total_amt_usd
	FROM orders
	LIMIT 10;
	
	
##LIKE
	...
	WHERE url LIKE '%C'
	...
	
##IN
	...
	WHERE name IN ('Walmart', 'Apple')
	...
	
##AND and BETWEEN
	WHERE column >= 6 AND column <= 10
	
	WHERE column BETWEEN 6 AND 10
	
	
## Recap
Commands


Statement	How to Use It	Other Details
SELECT	SELECT Col1, Col2, ...	Provide the columns you want
FROM	FROM Table	Provide the table where the columns exist
LIMIT	LIMIT 10	Limits based number of rows returned
ORDER BY	ORDER BY Col	Orders table based on the column. Used with DESC.
WHERE	WHERE Col > 5	A conditional statement to filter your results
LIKE	WHERE Col LIKE '%me%'	Only pulls rows where column has 'me' within the text
IN	WHERE Col IN ('Y', 'N')	A filter for only rows with column of 'Y' or 'N'
NOT	WHERE Col NOT IN ('Y', 'N')	NOT is frequently used with LIKE and IN
AND	WHERE Col1 > 5 AND Col2 < 3	Filter rows where two or more conditions must be true
OR	WHERE Col1 > 5 OR Col2 < 3	Filter rows where at least one condition must be true
BETWEEN	WHERE Col BETWEEN 3 AND 5	Often easier syntax than using an AND
Other Tips
Though SQL is not case sensitive (it doesn't care if you write your statements as all uppercase or lowercase), we discussed some best practices. The order of the key words does matter! Using what you know so far, you will want to write your statements as:

SELECT col1, col2
FROM table1
WHERE col3  > 5 AND col4 LIKE '%os%'
ORDER BY col5
LIMIT 10;
Notice, you can retrieve different columns than those being used in the ORDER BY and WHERE statements. Assuming all of these column names existed in this way (col1, col2, col3, col4, col5) within a table called table1, this query would run just fine.

Looking Ahead
In the next lesson, you will be learning about JOINs. This is the real secret (well not really a secret) behind the success of SQL as a language. JOINs allow us to combine multiple tables together. All of the operations we learned here will still be important moving forward, but we will be able to answer much more complex questions by combining information from multiple tables! You have already mastered so much - potentially writing your first code ever, but it is about to get so much better!